# Lifting state

## 📝 Your Notes

When you have sibling components that need to share state, the common solution
is to "lift the state". "Lift the state" essentially means find the lowest
common parent shared between the two components and place the state management
there, then pass down the state and a way to update that state to the components
that need to share the state.

Typically you'd colocate state with the component that needs it. That's the
first thing that should be done, it's best practice to define state as close to
where it's going to be used. As a project evolves you realize that state is
required by a sibling component or a component higher in the Component tree. At
that point in time it's a good idea to "Lift the state" and change the
"uncontrolled" component to a "controlled" component.

The meaning behind "uncontrolled" component is that it's a component that
manages its own state. A "controlled" component is a component that receives
props from a parent that controls the state of the props passed and the
"controlled" component just uses that managed state and updater from the parent.

On the flip side, there could be situations where having state too high in the
tree can have negative impacts on performance. Let's say I have a component that
is computationally expensive to re-render, and one of its siblings has state on
the same level which gets passed down via props. Now whenever that cheap to
render component has state updates, it'll trigger re-renders for the
computationally expensive one. This can significantly impact performance because
of all the un-necessary re-renders. If the other components do not need the
state of the cheap component, colocating that state within the component that
uses it can eliminate that performance issue. Now that the state is colocated
with the using component, it won't get affected by the expensive components
re-render.

Collocating state as close as reasonably possible to its use is generally a good
practice. This increases readability and simplicity of the component by
decreasing its API surface because it'd no longer accept props for the
collocated state.

## Background

A common question from React beginners is how to share state between two sibling
components. The answer is to
["lift the state"](https://react.dev/learn/sharing-state-between-components)
which basically amounts to finding the lowest common parent shared between the
two components and placing the state management there, and then passing the
state and a mechanism for updating that state down into the components that need
it.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/03.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.js)

👨‍💼 Peter told us we've got a new feature request for the `Display` component. He
wants us to display the `animal` the user selects. But that state is managed in
a "sibling" component, so we have to move that management to the lowest common
parent (`App`) and then pass it down.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 colocating state

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.extra-1.js)

As a community we’re pretty good at lifting state. It becomes natural over time.
One thing that we typically have trouble remembering to do is to push state back
down (or
[colocate state](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/state-colocation-will-make-your-react-app-faster)).

👨‍💼 Peter told us that now users only want the animal displayed instead of the
name:

```javascript
function Display({animal}) {
  return <div>{`Your favorite animal is: ${animal}!`}</div>
}
```

You'll notice that just updating the `Display` component to this works fine, but
for the extra credit, go through the process of moving state to the components
that need it. You know what you just did for the `Animal` component? You need to
do the opposite thing for the `Name` component.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=03%3A%20Lifting%20state&em=).
