# useRef and useEffect: DOM interaction

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

JSX is syntactic sugar for a `React.createElement` call, so in the components,
you don't actually have access to DOM nodes. DOM nodes aren't actually created
until the `ReactDOM.render` method is called. Function components are just
responsible for creating and returning React elements and has nothing to do with
the DOM in particular.

To get access to the DOM, you need to ask React to give you access to a
particular DOM node when it renders your component. The way this happens is
through a special prop called `ref`. You would use the `React.useRef` hook and
set the created ref to the element in which you want a ref for's `ref` prop.

```jsx
function myForm() {
  const myInputRef = React.useRef(null)

  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myInput = myInputRef.current
    // myInput is the input DOM node
    console.log(myInput)
  })

  return (
    <form>
      <input ref={myInputRef} value="hello" id="myInputId" />
    </form>
  )
}
```

After the component has rendered, it's considered "mounted". That's when the
`React.useEffect` callback is called and so by that point, the ref should have
its `current` property set to the DOM node. So often you'll do direct DOM
interactions/manipulations in the `useEffect` callback.

Any time you want to interact with the DOM, that interaction is a side effect,
so you'll have to use `React.useEffect`.

**Note**: When using `React.useEffect` it's important to declare your dependency
array, things that if changed you should trigger the `useEffect` callback to
run. An empty array signifies the `useEffect` should only be ran once on initial
render.

**Note**: If you return a function from a `useEffect` callback, that function
gets run when the component unmounts.

`React.useRef` returns an object with a `current` property and that current
property is mutable (meaning it can be changed without causing a re-render).
`React.useRef` is beneficial for more than just DOM nodes, you should use
`React.useRef` any time you want to maintain a reference to something and you
want to be able to make changes to that thing without triggering a re-render.

## Background

Often when working with React you'll need to integrate with UI libraries. Some
of these need to work directly with the DOM. Remember that when you do:
`<div>hi</div>` that's actually syntactic sugar for a `React.createElement` so
you don't actually have access to DOM nodes in your function component. In fact,
DOM nodes aren't created at all until the `ReactDOM.render` method is called.
Your function component is really just responsible for creating and returning
React Elements and has nothing to do with the DOM in particular.

So to get access to the DOM, you need to ask React to give you access to a
particular DOM node when it renders your component. The way this happens is
through a special prop called `ref`.

Here's a simple example of using the `ref` prop:

```javascript
function MyDiv() {
  const myDivRef = React.useRef()
  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myDiv = myDivRef.current
    // myDiv is the div DOM node!
    console.log(myDiv)
  }, [])
  return <div ref={myDivRef}>hi</div>
}
```

After the component has been rendered, it's considered "mounted." That's when
the React.useEffect callback is called and so by that point, the ref should have
its `current` property set to the DOM node. So often you'll do direct DOM
interactions/manipulations in the `useEffect` callback.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/05.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.js)

In this exercise we're going to make a `<Tilt />` component that renders a div
and uses the `vanilla-tilt` library to make it super fancy.

The thing is, `vanilla-tilt` works directly with DOM nodes to setup event
handlers and stuff, so we need access to the DOM node. But because we're not the
one calling `document.createElement` (React does) we need React to give it to
us.

So in this exercise we're going to use a `ref` so React can give us the DOM node
and then we can pass that on to `vanilla-tilt`.

Additionally, we'll need to clean up after ourselves if this component is
unmounted. Otherwise we'll have event handlers dangling around on DOM nodes that
are no longer in the document.

### Alternate

If you'd prefer to practice refactoring a class that does this to a hook, then
you can open `src/exercise/05-classes.js` and open that on
[an isolated page](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/05-classes.js) to
practice that.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=05%3A%20useRef%20and%20useEffect%3A%20DOM%20interaction&em=).
